ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS
BACHELOR OF TECHNOLOGY (B.TECH.)
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY RAIPUR

Office of Dean Academics
NIT Raipur
CG, India, 492010

i

Extracted from
“THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2007,
No. 29 of 2007, Dated 5th June, 2007”
Section 27, Page 7

Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of every Institute may provide for all or
anyof the following matters, namely:—
(a) The admission of the students to the Institute;
(b) The courses of study to be laid down for all degrees and diplomas of the Institute;
(c) The conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree or diploma courses and to the
examinations of the Institute, and shall be eligible for degrees and diplomas;
(d) The conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;
(e) The conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;
(f) The conduct of examinations;
(g) The maintenance of discipline among the students of the Institute; and
(h) Any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be or may be provided for by the Ordinances.

Ordinance: A local law, an edict or decree.
Regulation: A law or administrative rule, issued by an organization, used to guide or prescribe the conduct of members of that organization.

ii

CONTENTS

1

2
3
4

5.

About the Institute
A.
Vision of the Institute
B.
Mission of the Institute
Preamble
Acronyms and Definitions
Ordinance and Regulations
A.
Academic Programme
B.
Admission
C.
Academic Calendar
D.
Registration
E.
Structure of Programme
F.
Credit Requirements
G.
Grading System and Division
H.
Assessment Procedure
I.
Attendance Requirement and Absence
J.
Promotion
K.
Duration of Programme
L.
Eligibility for Award of the Degree
M. Temporary Withdrawal
N.
Faculty Advisor
O.
Course Evaluation by the Students
P.
Credit Transfer and Online Courses
Q.
Permanent Withdrawal
R.
Change of Branch
S.
Rules to deal with academic malpractice
T.
Power to Modify
Annexures
I. Regulations for change of branch after second semester
II. Constitution and functioning of DAC and DGC
III. Program Structure
IV. Regulations for unfair means

iii

1. About the Institute

The National Institute of Technology Raipur (NIT Raipur) is a technical institution funded by the
Government of India, located in Raipur, Chhattisgarh. Founded in 1956 as Govt. College of Mining &
Metallurgy with two engineering disciplines, mining and metallurgy, the institute is one of the oldest
of its kind in India. Currently it is one of the National Institutes of Technology, which have been
accorded Institute of National Importance status by the National Institutes of Technology Act, 2007.
National Institute of Technology, Raipur (NIT RR), upgraded from GEC Raipur in the year 2005, presently
runs academic courses in 12 major disciplines in the form of graduate and post graduate courses. The
Institute also inducts scholars for PhD courses. One of the biggest NIT, in the way of intake at UG level,
has a legacy of more than 60 years of service to the nation.

Vision of the Institute:
To be a leader in technical and management education in India and to establish a unique
identity for the development of high quality human and knowledge resource in diverse area
of technology and management.

Mission of the Institute:
To Re-engineer the engineering education and to mould young students into rational
thinking engineers who are motivated by a passion for professional excellence driven by
human values and proactively engaged in betterment of society.

iv

2. Preamble
2.1 The provisions in these regulations govern the conditions for imparting courses of instructions, conduction
of examinations and evaluation of performance of students leading to B. Tech. degrees programs in
National Institute of Technology Raipur (NITRR).
2.2 This ordinance supersedes all the previous ordinances, rules and regulations and are effective from the
academic year 2019-2020 onwards.
2.3 The curriculum intends to provide broad based knowledge and simultaneously builds a temper for the
lifelong process of learning and exploring. At undergraduate level, a student needs to do compulsory
foundation courses in the areas of Humanities, Basic Sciences and social sciences apart from the
departmental requirements. Departmental courses (core and electives) constitute minimum 50% of the
total curriculum. Further, students are allowed open category electives to broaden inter-disciplinary
knowledge base and to specialize in an area outside the parent discipline.
2.4 The medium of instruction in the Institute is English.
2.5 The Institute follows the semester system. An academic year runs from July through June next year and
comprises of two semesters and two terms. The First semester (Autumn Semester) starts in the third week
of July and ends in the middle of December, while, the second semester (Spring Semester) starts in first
week of January and ends in the middle of May. This is followed immediately by the Summer Term starts
which ends in the second week of July. The Winter Term starts around the third week of December.
2.6 The provisions of these regulations shall also be applicable to any new discipline that will be introduced
from time to time and added to the list of Academic Programme.
2.7 Notwithstanding all that has been stated in the Regulations, Senate has the right to review and change the
Regulations from time to time.
2.8 Any doubt or dispute arising about the interpretation of the Regulations shall be referred to the
Chairperson Senate whose decision shall be the final decision.

v

3. Acronyms
S.No

Acronym

Full Form

1

AI

All India

2

B. Tech

Bachelor of Technology

3

CCB

Central Counseling Board

4

CFTIs

Centrally Funded Technical Institutes

5

CGPA

Cumulative Grade Point Average

6

CPI

Cumulative Performance Index

7

DAC

Departmental Academic Committee

8

DGC

Departmental Grievance Committee

9

EPR

Essential Program Requirements

10

ESE

End Semester Exam

11

FIR

First Information Report

12

GoI

Government of India

13

HOD

Head of the Department

14

IISc

Indian Institute of Science

15

IIT

Indian Institute of Technology

16

JEE

Joint Entrance Examination

17

L

Lecture

18

MHRD

Ministry of Human Resource Development

19

MIS

Management Information System

20

MOOCs

Massive Open Online Courses

21

MSE

Mid Semester Exam

22

NCC

National Cadet Corps

23

NIT

National Institute of Technology

24

NSS

National Service Scheme

25

OE

Open Elective

26

P

Practical

27

PC

Programme Core

28

PrC

Project Committee

29

PE

Programme Elective

30

PG

Post Graduation

31

PLR

Programme Laboratory Requirements

32

SPI

Semester Performance Index

33

T

Tutorial

34

TA

Teacher’s Assessment

35

UFM

Unfair Means

36

UG

Under Graduation

37

UMC

Unfair Means Cases

vi

vii

4. Ordinance and Regulations
(B. Tech. Programs)
4. A.

Academic Programme
4. A.1. The B. Tech. Academic Programme comprises of the following disciplines in which the degrees are be
offered:
I.
II.
III.
IV.
V.
VI.
VII.
VIII.
IX.
X.
XI.

4.B.

Bio Medical Engineering
Bio Technology
Chemical Engineering
Civil Engineering
Computer Engineering
Electrical Engineering
Electronics and Communication Engineering
Information Technology
Mechanical Engineering
Metallurgical Engineering
Mining Engineering

Admission
4. B.1. The minimum qualification for admission to the first semester of B.Tech. Course shall normally be
the passing of a Higher Secondary School Certificate exam (10+2) scheme with Physics, Chemistry
and Mathematics conducted by recognized Board of Secondary Education or an equivalent exam of
a recognized Board/University as per the instructions received from Ministry of Human Resource
Development (MHRD), GoI from time to time.
4. B.2. Admission of Indian Nationals to the first semester of B.Tech. Course shall be through his relative
performance in Joint Entrance Examination (JEE) leading to securing a place in merit list of eligible
candidates and as governed by the rules of Central Counseling Board (CCB) time to time.
4. B.3. Direct admission of Foreign Nationals either residing in India or abroad or Indian nationals residing
abroad to the first semester of B.Tech. Course shall be according to the policy guidelines laid down
by the MHRD, Govt. of India/Board of Governors (BoG) of the Institute from time to time.
4. B.4. Students admitted to the B. Tech. Programmes shall normally pursue the Programme initially
allocated to them at the time of admission. However, the Senate may permit a limited number of
academically meritorious students as assessed by their performance in the Institute for first two
regular semesters, to change their Programme. Any such change of Programme shall be as per the
"Change of Branch Rules (Branch Sliding)" as given in the Annexure -1 of this document.
4. B.5. Every student, admitted provisionally or otherwise to the UG Programme of the Institute, shall
submit copies of the qualifying degree/provisional certificate and such other documents within the
stipulated date as prescribed by the Senate failing which may lead to cancellation of the admission
of the student by the Senate.
4. B.6. If, any time after admission, it is found that a candidate had not in fact fulfilled all the requirements
stipulated in the offer of admission, in any form what so ever, including possible misinformation etc.,
the Dean-Academic shall report the matter to the Senate recommending for cancelling the
admission of the candidate. The decision of the Senate, regarding the above, is final and binding.

4. B.7. The institute reserves the right to cancel the admission of any student and ask him/her to
discontinue his/her studies at any stage of his/her career on the grounds of indiscipline or any
misconduct. The decision of the Senate, regarding the above, is final and binding.
4. B.8. Candidates must fulfil the medical standards required for admission as prescribed by MHRD (GoI)
from time to time.

4. C.

Academic Calendar
4. C.1. The Academic Session shall commence in the month of July each year. Each Academic Session shall
consist of two regular semesters, Autumn (Odd) and Spring (Even) apart from vacations, and midsemester breaks, if any. Each regular semester shall normally consist of about eighteen (18) weeks
including examination period.
4. C.2. The exact dates for the important academic events scheduled during the Academic Session shall be
specified in the Academic Calendar.
4. C.3. The Academic Calendar, or any change therein during the session, shall require prior approval of the
Senate/ Chairman, Senate.

4. D.

Registration
4. D.1. Every student of B. Tech program is required to be present and register at the commencement of
each semester on the date fixed and notified in the Academic calendar. Registration process will
have three components.
4. D.1.1. Physical presence of the student on the first day of semester.
4. D.1.2. Payment of semester fees including any unpaid dues of past semesters, and
4. D.1.3. Getting enrolled/registered in the courses approved by the Departmental Academic
Committee (DAC) of the department. Constitution of DAC/DGC is given in Annexure – II.
4. D.2. Percentage attendance for all students will be counted from the date of commencement of the
semester, irrespective of his/her date of registration.
However, for First year students in first semester, attendance will be counted from date of admission
into the Institute or date of commencement of class work, whichever is later.
4. D.3. A student who does not register on the day announced for the purpose may be permitted by Dean
Academics in consideration of any compelling reasons for late registration within next one week on
payment of additional late fee as prescribed by the Institute from time to time. Normally, no late
registration beyond one week from the scheduled date of registration shall be allowed.
4. D.4 After registration in each semester, each student should collect a registration sheet, which indicates
the courses registered by him/her in that semester, signed by the faculty advisor/Head of the
Department (HOD). The student should carry this registration sheet for all the examinations in that
semester. This sheet shall serve the purpose of hall ticket for appearing for the examinations in that
semester.
4. D.5. Only those students will be permitted to register who have
4. D.5.1. Cleared all the institute and hostel dues of the previous semesters,
4. D.5.2. Paid all required fees of the current semester,
9

4. D.5.3. Not been debarred from registering for a specified period on disciplinary or any
other ground
4. D.5.4. Not been struck off from the rolls of the institute.
4. D.6. Except in 1st semester the tuition fees etc. will be paid semester wise and not year wise.
4. D.7. The classes of all semesters will start from the day following the registration or any other day as
decided by the institute authorities/mentioned in the Academic Calendar.
4. D.8. Students may register subject(s) (up to a maximum of 30 credits in a semester) with the concurrence
of the Head of the Department under intimation to the concerned course instructors and the
academic section provided this is done within the date mentioned in the academic calendar. An
elective course will normally be offered only if there is a minimum registration of 20 students. To
accommodate faster learning, students may be allowed to register for subjects of the higher
semester up to four credits, the suitability and feasibility of the same should be approved by the
DAC. For registering courses of higher semester, the student should posses a CPI of 8 or higher,
without any backlog.
4. D.9. If a student finds his/her load heavy in any semester, or for any other valid reason, he/she can drop
some courses within three weeks from the commencement of the class work in the semester with
the written approval of his/her Faculty Advisor and Head of the Department, with an intimation to
Dean-Academic. In such circumstances, the student shall not be eligible for the award of Distinction
even if she/he secures a CPI of 8.5 and satisfies the other requisite criterion as per rule 4.H.8. Elective
courses may normally be changed within a week from the commencement of classes.
4. D.10. Backlog subjects means subjects from the previous semesters with ‘F ‘grade. A student can appear
for supplementary examination in the backlog subject/s as and when it is conducted. In case a
student fails in the supplementary examination too then he/she has to register for a backlog subject
whenever it is offered. His/her previous marks/grades will be cancelled and she/he will have to
attend all classes and examinations as and when they are conducted. Major changes in the time
table shall not be entertained to accommodate backlog students.
4. D.11. A student must register for the backlog courses first giving priority to the oldest backlogs. [The
students will register by default for backlog courses being offered in a particular semester]. The
maximum credits (including backlog courses) that a student can register in a semester is 30.
However, students whose branch has been changed (as per Annexure I) in third semesters, can
register for four more credits over the ceiling of 30 in third and forth semesters, only for passing the
branch specific subject as per the requirement of the new branch.

4. E.

Structure of Programme
4. E.1. The normal duration of the course leading to B. Tech. degree will be eight semesters or four years.
Medium of instruction and examination will be English.
4. E.2. Teaching scheme of a subject, in general, has Lecture (L) with one credit per period per week,
Tutorial (T) and Laboratory/ Drawing/Workshop (P) components with half credit per period per
week. However, some of these components may not be present in some subjects.
4. E.3

Any change in syllabi (up to one unit of the existing) proposed by the course coordinator has to be
approved by the Departmental Academic Committee (DAC). Proposing changes in the syllabi for
more than a unit would be termed as Revision of syllabi. Such revisions and changes in courses and
curricula proposed by the course coordinator and recommended by DAC shall have to be placed
before the Senate for its approval.
10

4. E.4. The structure of B.Tech. Programmes shall have Essential Program Requirements (EPR), Programme
Core (PC), Elective Courses (PE and OE) and Programme Laboratory Requirements (PLR) as shown in
Annexure –III.
4. E.5.

The curriculum of individual programmes includes industrial training for 4-6 weeks. Industrial
training and/or fieldwork is to be satisfactorily completed before a student is declared eligible for
the degree. The industrial training will be arranged during the summer vacation following the Fourth
and sixth semester of studies. Attachment with an academic institution within the country (IISc/
IITs/NITs/IIITs and CFTIs) or university abroad is also permitted instead of industrial training. A report
is to be submitted to the Head of the Department and evaluation for one credit in Fifth Semester
and two credits in Seventh Semester will be based on the report, presentation and viva-voce
examination.

4. E.6. A student may be allowed for a semester-long internship in industry/organization in Eighth Semester
of the Programme provided the student has no backlog and he/she has received a pre-placement
offer/offer of the internship from a reputed industry/organization. The student will be evaluated on
the basis of a mid-semester evaluation, field evaluation report submitted by his/her supervisor
belonging to the Industry/organization and report submitted by the student along with presentation
and viva-voce in the department at the end of the semester. Attendance and the field evaluation
report must be submitted with in the time frame to the Head of the Department. Such a student will
have to successfully complete online courses/MOOCs approved by the DAC of the department as
per the specified scheme (curriculum). Credits of such approved courses will be transferable for the
calculation of SPI in the VIII Semester in the Institute.
4. E.7. Project work is scheduled during the VIIth(seventh) Semester of regular session of the respective
B.Tech. Programme. In order to promote interdisciplinary culture, a team of maximum four students
from various departments can be formed with the permission of the Heads of Departments
concerned in the second year itself. The project guide/s for such projects shall be from one or more
departments. Co-guide from industry or Institutes of National Repute is also permitted.

4. F.

Credit Requirements
4. F.1. Institute follows semester-based credit system of study. The prominent features of the credit system
are a process of continuous evaluation of a student’s progress and flexibility to allow a student to
progress at an optimum pace suited to his/her ability or convenience, subject to fulfilling minimum
requirements for continuation. A student’s progress is measured by the number of credits he/she
has earned, i.e. completed satisfactorily. Based on the course credits and grades obtained by the
student, Performance Index is calculated. A minimum Performance Index is required to be
maintained for satisfactory progress and continuation in the program. Also a minimum number of
earned credits and a minimum Performance Index should be acquired in order to qualify for the
degree. Minimum earned credit requirements for the 4-year B. Tech. programmes shall be 173.
4. F.2. Basis of Credits will be {L+T+P/2} where L, T and P are number of Lecture, Tutorial and Practical
periods respectively. Credit in a course will be a full number and if it falls to be a fractional one then
that will be considered as next higher full number. A candidate can earn all the credits allotted to a
semester only when he/she passes the said semester.
4. F.3. The credits for the courses in which a student has ‘E’ (minimum passing grade for a course)or a
higher grade will be counted as credits earned by him/her. Any course in which a student has
obtained R, F or W grade will not be counted towards his/her earned credits.

11

4. G.

Grading System
4. G.1. A letter grade, corresponding to specified number of grade points, is awarded in each course for
which a students is registered. Based on the sum total of marks obtained in TA, MSE and ESE, he/she
will be awarded a letter grade based on his/her relative performance (w.r.t. other students) in the
class of that course. The academic performance of a student shall be graded on a ten point scale. On
obtaining a pass grade, the student accumulates the course credits as earned credits. A student’s
performance is measured by the number of credits that he/she has earned and by the weighted
Performance Index. A minimum number of credits should be acquired in order to qualify for a degree
and continuation on semester basis.
4. G.2. The awards/grades are submitted in the Dean Academic office positively within the prescribed time
limit as announced in the academic calendar after the End Term examination.
4. G.3. The grades to be awarded, corresponding grade points and the description of performance are listed
below:
Grade
O
A
B
C
D
E
F
NA
W
R

Grade Points
10
9
8
7
6
5
0
----

X

--

Performance
Outstanding
Excellent
Very Good
Good
Fair
Average
Fail
Not Appeared in ESE
Withdrawal from the semester
Insufficient Attendance (to be
repeated)
Debarred

The norms for the award of the letter grade are as follows:
I.
II.
III.
IV.

No student can be awarded E or better grade without securing at least 35% aggregate marks in
any course, i.e. in (MSE+ESE+TA).
For award of E or better Grade, it is also mandatory that the student should secure at least 35%
marks of the maximum marks awarded/scored in the End Semester examination in the course.
The class average is calculated by excluding the marks obtained by F grade students.
Further, there shall be four transitional grading symbols, which can be used by the examiners to
indicate the special position of a student in the subject.
NA: for “Incomplete assessment” due to non-appearance in an exam, if the student misses the
End-semester examination.
R: for 'Insufficient attendance’ in the course (that course is to be repeated).
W: for "Temporary withdrawal' from the Semester.
X: for "Debarred" on grounds of malpractices in examinations or indisciplinary behavior, etc.

4. G.4. An 'O' grade stands for outstanding achievement. The 'E' grade stands for average performance
representing the minimum passing grade in any course.
4. G.5. The 'F' grade denotes failing in a course. A student has to repeat the courses in which he/she obtains
'F' grade, until a passing grade is obtained. 'F' grade may result in increased period of stay for
completing degree requirements. No SPI will be awarded if a student has obtained one or more
grade ‘F’ in a particular semester.
12

4. G.6. The student who remains absent (due to compelling reasons as mentioned in the clause 4.H.1-(iv))
in the end semester examination will be awarded ‘NA’ grade. When a student gets ‘NA’ grade for
any subject(s) during a semester, the SPI of that semester and the CPI at the end of that semester
will become zero until that particular course/semester is not cleared by the student. Such student
must appear in the supplementary examination to convert the ‘NA’ grade to any pass grade. If such
a student remains absent in the supplementary examination too then he/she will be awarded ‘F’
grade.
4. G.7. A 'W' grade is awarded in a course where the student has opted to withdraw from the semester.
Withdrawal from a course is permitted until the commencement of the mid-semester examination.
4. G.8. The ‘R’ grade is awarded for insufficient attendance (as mentioned under section 4. I) and student
has to repeat the course during the next year whenever it is offered or later as advised by the DAC.
4. G.9. The performance of a student is evaluated in terms of two indices, viz. the Semester Performance
Index (SPI) which is the Performance Index for a semester and Cumulative Performance Index (CPI)
which is the Performance Index for all the completed semesters, at any point of time. The SPI is
calculated on the basis of grades obtained in all courses registered for the semester. The CPI is
calculated on the basis of all pass grades obtained in all completed semesters. Both SPI and CPI will
be taken up to the second place of decimal without rounding off and recorded as such.
SPI =

CPI =

∑ courses.(Course credit × Grade point)
∑courses.(Course credit)

∑All sem. completed(Course credit × Grade point) in passed courses
∑All sem. completed(Course credit) in passed courses

4. G.10. The CPI, SPI and the grades obtained in all the subjects in a semester will be communicated to every
student at the end of every semester except in final year, second semester (i.e. VIIIth semester of B.
Tech. courses) through a grade sheet. In its place a consolidated grade sheet will be issued for final
semester. This consolidated grade sheet supersedes all the earlier grade sheets.

4. H.

Assessment Procedure
4. H.1. (i) The teacher’s assessment would be carried out with Class tests, assignments, viva-voce, quizzes,
laboratory assignments etc., being the constituent components of continuous assessment process,
and a student must undergo the continuous assessment process as prescribed by the
teacher/coordination committee of the subject. If due to any compelling reason (such as his/her
illness, calamity in the family etc.) a student fails to meet any of the requirements within/on the
scheduled date and time, the teacher/coordination committee in consultation with the concerned
Head of the Department may take such steps (including the conduct of compensatory
tests/examinations) as are deemed fit. In each semester, there shall be one mid semester exam
(MSE), and one end semester exam (ESE) apart from surprise tests/quizzes/assignments. Students
will be permitted to appear in the examinations in only those subjects for which they have registered
at the beginning of the semester. The mid semester and supplementary examinations will be
conducted by the Departments as per the schedule and guidelines provided by the Academic
calendar. By the mid semester examination, minimum two units of the syllabus should be
completed. End Semester examination is normally conducted centrally in the Institute.
(ii) If a student fails to appear for the mid semester examination in any subject(s) due to compelling
reason like serious illness of himself/herself which necessitates hospitalization/bed rest (with
13

intimation to the institute medical officer) or a calamity in the family, he/she shall apply immediately
to the Head of the Department, along with relevant certificates within one week after completion
of the examinations. All such cases will be scrutinized by DAC and approved list of candidates shall
be permitted for a re-examination and the period of re-examination and syllabus shall be notified
by the respective Head of the Department.
(iii) Appearing in the end-semester examination in the theory and laboratory subjects is mandatory
for a student. Unless exempted as stated below, if a student fails to appear for the end–semester
examination, he/she shall be awarded ‘F’ grade in the subject. He/she can be permitted to appear
for the Supplementary examinations to be conducted later, as announced in the academic calendar.
In such cases, the student will be awarded only ‘E’ grade in-case the student gets more than 35 %
marks in the Supplementary examination.
(iv) However, if a student misses the end-semester examinations due to a compelling reason like
serious illness of himself/herself which necessitates hospitalization or a calamity in the family,
he/she may appeal to the Dean-Academic before commencement of examination through his/her
Head of the Department and Institute Medical Officer for permitting himself/herself to appear in
the subsequent examination(s), when conducted next. DAC of that department may, after
examining the documents and being convinced about the merit of the case, recommend permitting
him/her to appear in the subsequent supplementary examination(s). In such cases, transitory grade
‘NA’ is temporarily awarded to the student in the subject.
(v) Summer Semester during Summer vacation may be conducted for those students of final year
only who have been awarded F or R grades in the immediate preceding seventh and /or eighth
semester supplementary examination. Such students must not have any back-log up to third year at
the time of registering in Summer Semester.
4. H.2. The weightage assigned to various components of Teacher’s assessment (TA) shall be announced by
the concerned class teachers in the beginning of the semester. Each student, registered for a course,
shall be awarded marks by the concerned teacher/faculty in-charge. The marks awarded to a student
depend upon his/her performance in various examinations, laboratory works/ assignment etc. The
marks awarded are to be used to award the relative letter grades, and grade point.
4. H.3. Assessment of Lecture Courses: The mid and end semester examinations are of 2 hours and 3 hours
respectively. Review of question papers shall be done by the committee appointed at the
departmental level. Result analysis shall be done at the Departmental Academic Committee (DAC)
meeting and the same shall be reported to the Senate. The evaluation pattern for the theory courses
shall be as under:
Sub-component
TA: Class tests/ Quizzes/ Assignment/Tutorials, etc.
Mid semester exam
End semester exam

Weightage
20 marks
30 marks
50 marks

4. H.4. Assessment of Laboratory Courses: The continuous assessment in a laboratory course in each
semester shall be for 100 marks, with the following weightages:
Sub-component
Weightage
Continuous evaluation (TA)
40 marks
Mid-semester evaluation
20 marks
End Semester examination
40 marks
The marks for continuous evaluation may be distributed among various components like class work
performance, Lab records, Quizzes, skill tests/assignments/mini projects and mid semester
evaluation comprises of performance of the practical and viva-voce.
14

4. H.5. Project: Number of students assigned a project work should be restricted to a maximum of four.
Head of each Department shall appoint a project coordinator who in consultation with the other
faculty members will prepare a list of project topics to be given to the students at the beginning of
7th semester. The project evaluation for the B. Tech. Programme shall be carried out by a Project
committee (PrC) comprising, the Head of the Department or his/her nominee (Chairman), project
coordinator and the project guide/s. The allocation of projects, faculty guides and tentative plan of
work are to be done before the last day of class of the 6th semester. A mid-semester assessment
and end-semester assessment will be carried out for each Part by the project coordinator and
supervisor/s. The students are to be continuously assessed on their initiative, interest, effort and
regularity shown during the project work and in the preparation of the project report. The project
work shall be evaluated for 100 marks, with the following weightages:
Sub-component
Periodic evaluation by Guide (TA)
Midterm review
End Semester viva-voce examination

Weightage
40 marks
20 marks
40 marks

If the performance of a student is not satisfactory, he/she can be awarded ‘F’ grade. Such a student
will be given a maximum time of three months to improve his/her performance. If the performance
of such a student is not satisfactory even after the extended time period, he/she will have to repeat
the project work in the next academic year. The Departments have to evolve rubrics for evaluation
of Project work. The marks may be distributed among various components like selection of topic,
problem statement, literature review, methodology, oral and written presentation of the work done
and performance in viva-voce examination. The final evaluation of the project work will be done at
the end of second semester, final year. Any conduct on the part of students with regard to plagiarism
(in project report or elsewhere) will be considered as indulgence in unethical means, and will invite
strict disciplinary action.
4. H.6. (i) The final grades awarded to the students in a subject must be submitted by the teacher/Chairman,
Project committee to the concerned Head of the Department. The Head of the Department shall
place the grades of students in all subjects before the DAC for its consideration and
recommendation. The grades recommended by the DAC shall be sent to the Examination section.
(ii) As a process of learning by students and also to ensure transparency, the answer scripts after
correction of class tests, mid-semester examinations, assignments etc., will be shown to the
students within the time-frame as mentioned in the Academic Calendar. The teacher/ Chairman,
Coordination Committee must submit the marks obtained in mid semester examinations to the Head
of the Department two weeks after the end of mid semester examinations. The marks obtained in
class tests/ minor tests held till that date also need to be submitted to the Head of the Department.
The performance of the students in these examinations will be discussed in the DAC.
(iv) In order to ensure transparency in the evaluation of scripts of end-semester examination, those
answer scripts also shall be shown to the students up to one day before the finalization of grades.
Once the Grades are finalized by DAC, the student will no longer have any right to verify his/her
answer scripts. The student can appeal to DGC for any arbitration within one week from the date of
official publication of interim results in the Institute Website.
4. H.7. A student of the B. Tech. degree program must complete the prescribed course work with a
minimum requirement of 173 credits within a maximum period of seven years starting from
registration of I year I Sem.
4. H.8 (i) A student is considered eligible for the award of Honors if she/he
15

a) has passed minimum two extra theory subjects (approved by DAC) other than the stipulated
ones. The extra theory subjects should comprise of minimum six and maximum eight credits
over and above the minimum credit requirement of the concerned branch.
b) has passed all the courses without securing R, X, F or W Grades during the period of study,
c) has passed all the courses without dropping any courses in any semester and
d) has passed securing a CPI of 8.5 and above.
If a department offers one or more courses beyond the minimum credit requirement, the same
shall not be considered for award of honours.
(ii) A student is considered eligible for the award of First Division with Distinction if she/he has passed
all the courses
a) Without securing R, X, F or W Grades during the period of study,
b) Without dropping any courses in any semester, and
c) With a CPI of 8.5 and above.
(iii) A student failing to satisfy Rule 4. H.8 (I and ii), even if he/she gets a CPI of 8.5 or more will not
be eligible for the award of Distinction and will be awarded First Division only.
(iv) A student with a CPI of 6.5 and above but less than 8.5 is considered eligible for the award of
First Division.
(v) A student with a CPI of 5.0 and above but less than 6.5 is considered eligible for the award of
Second Division.
4. H.9 The valued answer scripts shall be preserved for a maximum period of 12 (twelve) months after
publication of results. The teachers are required to send the valued answer scripts of both mid
semester and end semester examinations to the examination section to preserve them.

4. I.

Attendance Requirement and Absence
4. I.1.

Every student must attend all theory, tutorials and practical classes in the subjects in which she/he
has registered at the beginning of the semester. However, to account for constraints/unavoidable
circumstances, a condonation for the shortage of attendance up to 15 % can be granted by the DAC
of the concerned department.
A short fall in attendance up to a further 10% can be condoned by the Dean of Academic Affairs
under satisfactory reasons. In truly exceptional circumstances, the Director may relax attendance
requirements with reduction of grade, one or two steps lower, as it may be thought appropriate and
recommended by a committee constituted for the purpose.

4. I.2.

Students not having minimum 75 %(including condonation) attendance in any course, shall not be
permitted to appear for the end semester examination in that subject and is awarded “R” Grade in
that course. Such student has to register for the course in which he/she has shortage of attendance,
as and when the course is offered next.

4. I.3

If the period of absence is for a short duration (of not more than two weeks), application for leave
shall have to be submitted to the Head of the Department concerned stating fully the reasons for
the leave requested for along with supporting document(s). The Head of the Department will grant
such leave. During such leave period, the student will be marked as absent. Even with this leave
16

applied, the student must satisfy at least 75 % attendance requirement to appear for end semester
examination.

4. J.

4. I.4.

A student must inform the Dean (Academics) through Head of the Department immediately of any
instance of continuous absence from classes.

4. I.5.

The students will be informed of the status of attendance by the concerned course teacher at least
twice in a semester. (to be listed under the duties of course coordinator/subject teacher).

4. I.6.

A student representing the Institute in approved extracurricular activities such as Sports, Games,
Cultural meets, Seminar, Workshop, Conference and Interview arranged through Training &
Placement Department, NCC/ NSS Camps etc., shall be considered as on-duty subject to a maximum
of five days in a semester. Prior permission from competent authority is required for availing on
duty permission. The period of absence can be counted as ‘present’ for the computation of
percentage of attendance at the end of semester.

Promotion
4. J.1. There are no restrictions for promotion to next semester. However, as per clause 4.D.11, a student
can register for maximum of 30 credits in a semester. In case of backlog, the student must register
in the backlog papers first, giving priority to the oldest backlogs. A student will be permitted to
register for maximum of seven theory subjects in any semester including backlog papers.
4. J.2. Once a candidate has passed a semester examination, one shall NOT be permitted to reappear in
that examination or part thereof with a purpose of improvement of performance in exam, such as,
division, marks, grades etc.

4. K.

Duration of the Programme
4. K.1. Normally a student has to complete all the requirements for B. Tech.Programmes in four years (eight
semesters). Academically weak students who are unable to pass in some courses and have to repeat
them in subsequent semesters or register for lesser number of courses in a semester on their own
or as per the advice of the DAC, shall be permitted to complete all the requirements of the degree
in maximum 14 consecutive semesters (seven years). The same holds equally for students who have
requested and been granted temporary withdrawal.

4. L.

Eligibility for the Award of the Degree
4. L.1. A candidate shall be eligible for the award of the degree of the Bachelor of Technology (B.Tech.) only
if the candidate:
i)
ii)
iii)
iv)
v)

Has undergone the prescribed programme of study (by registering and crediting all core,
professional and Open elective subjects),
Has earned the minimum total number of credits specified in the curriculum of the relevant
programme of study,
Has obtained prescribed CPI of 5.0 or above within specified maximum permissible
duration,
Has no dues to the Institution, Library, Hostels, etc.,
Has no disciplinary action pending against him/her.

17

4. M.

Temporary Withdrawal from a semester
4. M.1. A student who is unable to attend classes for more than four weeks (twenty teaching days) in a
Semester, may apply to the Dean, Academics through Convener, DAC, for withdrawal from the
Semester along with supporting documents, which shall mean withdrawal from all the registered
courses in the Semester. Dean Academics shall put-up such cases with his recommendations to
Chairman Senate for approval, decision of the Director & Chairman Senate will be final. For
Application for semester withdrawal must be made as early as possible and latest one week before
the start of the End Semester Examination.
4. M.2. Partial withdrawal from the semester shall not be allowed.
4. M.3 Any application on medical grounds shall be accompanied with a medical certificate from the
institute Medical Officer. A certificate from a registered medical practitioner containing the
registration number may also be accepted in those cases where a student is normally residing off
campus or becomes ill while away from the Institute.
4. M.4. A student will be permitted for semester withdrawal only twice in the entire duration of his
programme.
4.M.5. Such a student will be awarded ‘W’ grade in all subjects in the semester in which temporary
withdrawal is made. Such a student will have to pay semester admission and institute fee for the
semester in which temporary withdrawal is made.

4. N.

Faculty Advisor
4. N.1. To help the students in planning their courses of study and to render general advice regarding either
the academic programme or any other activity, the Head of the Department concerned, will assign
every year, a certain number of students from the first year to a faculty member who will be called
Faculty Adviser. The set of students thus assigned will continue to be under the guidance of this
Faculty Adviser till they complete the programme or replaced by the HOD.

4. O.

Course Evaluation by the students (Feedback)
4. O.1 Every course run in a semester is evaluated on the basis of feedback received from the students
registered in that course. During the last week of a semester, the students shall give their feedback
on the courses studied by them during the semester. The feedback system shall be computerized
and coordinated by the MIS personnel. The compiled feedback reports shall be forwarded by the
MIS personnel to the concerned Head of the Department who will scrutinize the same and may take
appropriate steps to enhance the quality of teaching of the courses. If the feedback belongs to a
subject handled by the Head of the Department, then the same shall be scrutinized by the Dean
(Academics). Results will be withheld for those students who have not submitted the feedback.

4.P.

Credit Transfer and Online (MOOC) courses
4.P.1. Within the broad framework of these regulations, Dean Academics on the recommendation of the
concerned DAC may permit students to earn part of the credit requirements in other institutes of
repute and status in the country or abroad.

18

4.Q

4.P.2

Student can register for online (MOOC) courses against an elective (PE and/or OE) as per the
approved Scheme of the programme based on the recommendation of DAC and approval of the
Head of the Department. Credits will be earned only when such courses are of minimum 40 hours’
duration and are evaluated by the agency offering the online course. Corresponding institute grades
will be decided by the DAC. The Online (MOOC) courses must be from renowned sources and
recognized by the respective DAC.

4.P.3

In case the an online course is not evaluated(no grading provided) or the grading provided cannot
be mapped as per clause 4.G.3, the students will have to appear in examination conducted by the
department for evaluation. The DAC will appoint a faculty to guide and evaluate such student.

Permanent Withdrawal

Once the admission for the year is closed, the following conditions govern for permanent withdrawal of
admissions:
4.Q.1

4.Q.2
4.Q.3

4.R

A student, who wants to leave the Institute for good, will be permitted to do so, only after clearing
all the dues, if any. Also, all the fees and charges already paid by him/her will not be refunded on
any account.
Those students who have received any scholarship, stipend or other forms of assistance from the
Institute shall repay all such amounts.
The decision of the Director and Chairman, Senate regarding all aspects of withdrawal of a student
shall be final and binding.

Change of Branch
A student admitted to a particular branch of the B. Tech. programmes will normally continue studying in that
branch till completion of degree. However, the Institute may permit a student admitted as per guidelines of
MHRD, Govt. of India, to change branch at the end of the first two semesters, provided vacancies exist in
such branches. Rules for change of branch is given in Annexure-I.

4.S

Rules to Deal with Academic Malpractices and Misconduct
4.S.1 Every student of the institute is expected to maintain highest level of integrity and honesty in academics
befitting the student of an institute of national importance. Rules to deal with unfair means (UFM)
adopted by a student is given in Annexure –IV.
4.S.2 Any misconduct not related to academics or not covered under UFM rules, will be dealt by the institute
and the corresponding punishment pertaining to academics will be binding on the student.

4.T

Power to Modify
4.T.1 Not withstanding all that has been stated above, the senate of the institute, has the right to modify any
or all the above rules and regulations from time to time.
4.T.2 In emergency situations, the Director in capacity of the Chairman Senate, can exercise powers of the
Senate and discharge the functions of the Senate. Such decisions must be reported to the Senate in its
next meeting.
-xXx-

19

20

Annexure - I
REGULATIONS FOR CHANGE OF BRANCH AFTER SECOND SEMESTER
1. Student admitted to a particular branch of the B. Tech. course will normally continue studying in that branch
till completion. However, in special cases the Institute may permit a student, admitted through JEE Main to
change from one branch to another after the first two semesters. Such changes will be permitted, strictly in
accordance with provisions laid down hereafter.
2. Only those students will be eligible for consideration for change of branch after the second semester, who
havea. Completed all the credits prescribed in the first two semesters.
b. Obtained a CGPA/CPI of not less than 7.5 at the end of second semester in one single attempt
only.
3. Repeaters are not eligible to take part in this process.
4. Depending on the vacancies Dean, Academic Affairs may issue a notification inviting application for change
of branch from the intending eligible students.
5. Change of branch shall be made strictly on the basis of inter se merit of the applicants. For this purpose CPI
obtained in second semester by the applicant shall be considered. Ties will be resolved by the AI rank of the
applicants in JEE Main.
6. As prescribed in the scheme of studies of Ist & IInd Semester, if a student belonging (say) ‘X’ branch slides
(say) to ‘Y’ branch, then he/she will have to register in all those branch-specific Basic Engineering subjects
which were offered to his counter parts in ‘Y’ branch in their first year. This is necessary for a student whose
branch has been changed to complete the requirement for branch ‘Y’. In doing so, a slided student can
register for at the most two subjects (as per the requirement) offered in first year of branch ‘Y’ in the 3rd
semester of his changed (slided) branch. In case, the students has to register for three additional subjects,
he/she shall register for two subjects in third semester and shall register for the third subject in fourth
semester compulsorily. For such cases, the maximum credit limit per semester for 3rd and 4th will be 34
credits. For such subjects, the students have to secure E or higher grade, and the same won’t be considered
for calculation of CPI, SPI or determining eligibility for B.Tech (Hons.) and B.Tech with distinction.
7. The applicants may be allowed a change of branch, strictly in the order of merit, subject to the condition
that the student strength in a particular branch from which transfer is made, does not fall below 60% of the
sanctioned strength.
8. If a student is denied change of branch due to above reason, no other student with lesser CPI should be
permitted for change of Branch.
9. All changes of branch made in accordance with the above rules will be effective from the third semester of
the applicants concerned. No change of branch shall be permitted thereafter.
10. All changes of branch will be final and binding on the applicants. No student will be permitted under any
circumstances to refuse the change of branch offered.

21

CONSTITUTION & FUNCTIONING OF
DEPARTMENTAL ACADEMIC COMMITTEE (DAC)

Annexure - II

CONSTITUTION
Chairperson
Convener
Member

- Ex officio Head of the department
- Any faculty member of department nominated by Chairperson
i) Three faculty members of the department preferably senior faculty of the
department.
ii) One faculty member from outside the department.

Student Member

- One student from pre final year with good academic record.

External Member

- One from other NIT/IIT/IISC/ISI/Reputed Institute and one from Field/Industry

•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Members from the department may be less than three, in case three faculty members are not available in
the department.
All the members of the committee will be nominated by the head of the department in consultation with
the faculty members.
Chairperson may invite any other faculty member in a particular meeting as a invitee member, if need rises.
In a meeting, where matter is related to PG course, one senior faculty member of the concerned
specialization should be called in the meeting as a invitee member.
Two separate panels of external members should be prepared, one from academic institute & others from
field/industries. Any one member from each of these panels may be called as per need.
External members will only be called in case of introduction/removal/modification of the courses and
development of the course.
Students may not be allowed in a meeting of confidential nature.

QUORUM
Convener and Chairperson of DAC will make every efforts so that all members attend the meeting. However, to
hold the meeting quorum will be 2/3rd of due members.
FUNCTIONS

1.

To monitor the conduct of all courses of the department including PG courses (if any).

2.

To ensure & suggest suitable measures for academic excellence of the courses offered by the department.

3.

To develop the curriculum (syllabus, scheme) for the UG and PG courses offered by the department and
recommend the same to the Senate. To propose modification in the existing ordinance, if necessary.

4.

To propose new courses or closer of existing courses.

5.

To recommend the semester result to Dean(Academic) for declaration.

6.

To take up any responsibility or function assigned by the senate.
22

7.

Committee may recommend any academic matter for its inclusion in the senate meeting.

8.

To obtain feedback of the performance appraisal of the course instructor from the students in the prescribed
format.

TENURE OF THE COMMITTEE
The tenure of members will be of two years.

DUTIES/RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CHAIRPERSON
1.
To nominate convener and all members of the committee and send the names to Dean (Academic).
2.

To ensure that the meeting of the committee is called regularly and recommendation of the committee are
complied with after approval of competent authority.

DUTIES/RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CONVENER

1.

To call the meeting at least once in a calendar month and whenever necessity arises.

2.

To call the meeting immediately after the semester result is prepared for recommending it for declaration.

3.

To document the minutes of the meeting and communicate recommendations to Dean (Academic) through
Chairperson.

23

CONSTITUTION & FUNCTIONING OF
DEPARTMENTAL GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE (DGC)
Applicable for all degree awarding departments
CONSTITUTION
Chairperson
Convener
Member

•
•
•
•

- Ex officio Head of the department
- Convener of DAC will be the convener of Grievance Committee
i) Three faculty members of the department who are member of DAC from department.
ii) One faculty member from outside the department, who is member of DAC.

Members from the department may be less than three, in case three faculty members are not available in
the department.
All the members of the committee will be nominated by the head of the department in consultation with
the faculty members.
Chairperson may invite any other faculty member in a particular meeting as a invitee member, if need rises.
In a meeting, where matter is related to PG course, one senior faculty member of the concerned
specialization should be called in the meeting as a invitee member.

QUORUM
Convener and Chairperson of Grievances Committee will make every efforts so that all members attend the
meeting. However, to hold the meeting quorum will be 2/3rd of due members.

FUNCTIONS

1.

To receive issues and grievances/complaints in writing from the students regarding shortage of attendance,
admission, detention, examination and other academic activities and make recommendation suitably.

2.

To receive grievances/complaints in writing from the students regarding anomaly in award of marks/grades
due to bias, victimization erratic evaluation etc. and redress the complaints.

3.

To interact with the concerned course teacher/question paper setter and student separately in the case of
complaints as mentioned in point no. 2 above. Finally suitable recommendation shall be

TENURE OF THE COMMITTEE
The tenure of members will be of two years.

DUTIES/RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CHAIRPERSON
1.

To nominate convener and all members of the committee and send the names to Dean (Academic).

2.

To ensure that the meeting of the committee is called regularly and recommendation of the committee are
complied with after approval of competent authority.
24

DUTIES/RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CONVENER

1.

To call the meeting whenever necessity arises.

2.

To document the minutes of the meeting and communicate recommendations to Dean (Academic) through
Chairperson.
-xXx-

25

Annexure - III

Program Structure
The structure of B.Tech. Programmes shall have Essential Program Requirements (EPR), Programme
Core (PC), Elective Courses (PE and OE) and Programme Laboratory Requirements (PLR) as
follows:
Essential Program Requirements:

S. No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.

Course Name
Mathematics
Physics*
Chemistry*
Professional Ethics/Value
Education
Communication Skills
Ecology and Environment*
Engineering Practice#
Basic Engineering*#
Computer Courses*
Training/Internship
Project work
Extra Academic Activity
Total

No. of Courses
4
2
1
1

Max. Credits
16
8
4
1

1
1
1
3
1
2
1
2
15
(Excluding S. No. 10, 11
and 12)

4
4
2
12
4
3
4
1
63

* Including Lab
# Branch Specific
Programme Core Requirements (PCR):
Number of Core courses: 17 (Minimum)
Number of credits: 68
Elective Course Requirements:
Number of Programme electives (PE): 6 (Minimum)
Number of Credits for Programme Electives: 18
Number of Open electives (OE): 5 (Minimum)
Number of Credits for Open Electives: 15
Programme Laboratory Requirements (PLR):
Number of Programme Laboratories: 9 (Minimum)
Number of Credits: 9
The above distribution of the EPR, PCR, PE, OE and PLR can be modified with the approval of
the Senate.

- 25 -

Annexure -IV

PROCESS AND REGULATIONS FOR UNFAIR MEANS CASES

Standard operating procedure for dealing with cases of unfair means:-

A candidate found guilty of any of the following offences shall be deemed to have used unfair
means and his/her examination result shall be withheld. The UFM Committee appointed by the
Institute shall after giving a personal hearing recommend the penalty, if any, to be imposed on the
candidate. If the candidate fails to turn up before the committee for personal hearing, the committee
shall be entitled to decide the case on basis of record and recommend penalty, if any, to be imposed
without giving any further opportunity of hearing.
Formation of UFM Committee:
There will be four members in UFM committee including chairperson. Chairperson and
Members will be recommended by the Prof (I/c) Examinations and Dean Academics and approved by
the Director. Term for the chairperson and member will be for two years. Director may change or
increase the term of any member of the committee.

(a)

Procedure for booking of cases of use of Unfair Means at the examination centre:

1.

Issuance of Second Answer Sheet. As soon as any case of unfair means comes to the notice
of the Superintendent/ Invigilator of the examination center he/she shall take possession of
the Answer Sheet of the candidate along with paper or other material found in his/her
possession and provide the candidate with a second Answer Sheet immediately. On the top of
the Answer Sheet it should be super scribed “Second Answer Sheet”. The Superintendent shall
record on the first Answer Sheet the time when the case was brought to his/her notice. He/She
shall also record the time on the second Answer Sheet when it was issued to the candidate.

2.

Explanation of the Candidate.
While issuing the second Answer Sheet the candidate
shall be asked by the Centre Superintendent to submit his/her explanation in writing. In case
the candidate refuses to give his/her statement, he/she should not be forced to do so, only
the fact of his/her refusal should be recorded by the Invigilator/s on duty at the time of
occurrence and such a statement of the Invigilator/s be attested by the Centre
Superintendent.

3.

Statement of the Invigilator. The Invigilator, who detects the use of UFM by a candidate, shall
also record his/her statement which shall be verified and signed by the Centre
Superintendent. The statement of invigilator should clearly indicate the details of incident.

4.

Material found from the candidate. As far as possible precise information as to from where
the material was found (in the pocket, desk, shoes etc.) should be mentioned in the statement
of the Invigilator/s. The copying material so detected by an Invigilator should also be signed

- 26 -

by the Invigilator and countersigned by the Centre Superintendent on each page and the total
number of pages detected should be mentioned on the title of the Answer Sheet duly signed
by the Invigilator and Centre Superintendent.
5.

Procedure to be followed in case of smuggling out an Answer Sheet.
In
case
a
candidate has smuggled out an answer Sheet, the Centre Superintendent should call for the
candidate directly and try to secure the Answer Sheet. In case of non-availability of the Answer
Sheet, the matter should be reported to the police and a copy of the FIR be sent to the office
of Controller of Examination along with the statement of the Invigilator present in the room
and also of the candidate. The statement of the peon/police constable etc., if any, should also
be forwarded.

6.

Other Cases of Unfair Means
a) Impersonation.
In case of impersonation, the Centre Superintendent should send to
the Controller of Examination, the statement of the person found to be impersonating, the
Invigilator/s and the real candidate, if possible. He/She may also report the matter to the
police and shall arrange for taking photographs of the impersonator from 3 angles (front
and two sides, left and right) and send along with the case.

b) Misconduct.
In case of misconduct by a student, the punishment / penalty will
become serious. In case of misconduct of a serious nature, the matter should be reported
to the police, if necessary. Statement of the Invigilator/s and that of the peon/policeman
concerned may be obtained and sent to the office of the Controller of Examination.

7.

8.

Documents Required to be Sent in UFM Cases.
All cases of UFM should be recorded in the
prescribed form for reporting UFM cases as given in Annexure - A. The form shall be
accompanied by the following documents:a)

First and/or second Answer Sheets

b)

Explanation of the candidate

c)

Statement of the Invigilator

d)

Incriminating material found from the student

Submission of Unfair means cases. A separate sealed cover should be sent to the office of
Controller of Examination along with the prescribed Performa in each case booked daily under
UFM with a covering Performa generated by MIS.

- 27 -

List of penalties for different types of cases under UFM.

Category of
offence

Offence(s)

Penalty

A

Recovered material not related to the subject or
found writing something on the question paper,

Issue of warning not to repeat
the same

B

Relevant material written by the candidate on any
part of body, wall, door of the room, table/ desk,
other devices used by the candidate.

Award of F grade in the
concerned paper of current
examination.

OR

If the current examination
happens
to
be
the
supplementary exam then F
grade will imply R grade.

Recovered matter related to the subject found on
person of the candidate whether used or not used
for writing answer(s)
OR
The candidate is copying from copy of other
candidate and/or helping others to copy
OR
Carrying electronic gadgets in the examination
hall which are not explicitly allowed
OR
Candidate is caught with a material which he/she
has chewed or swallowed or torn into pieces and
the candidate refuses to sign the documents
OR
Replacement of Answer Sheet, exchange of Answer
Sheet with other student, addition of extra pages
in the Answer Sheet, smuggling of Answer
Sheet/pages,
C

Manhandling with staff on duty or creating
disturbance in the examination hall/center.

Award of F grade in all the
subjects in the current
examination. If the current
examination happens to be
the supplementary exam then
F grade will imply R grade.

D

Carrying the answer
examination hall.

Award of R grade in all the
subjects in the current
examination and debarring
for immediate next semester
from academic activities. The
period for which the student

sheet

OR

- 28 -

away

from

the

Impersonation

is
debarred,
would
be
considered for calculating the
maximum stipulated time
(seven years) for completing
the program.

E

Two times indulgence in UFM as per category B, C
and D above.

Award of R grade in all the
subjects in the current
examination and debarring
for immediate next semester
from academic activities. The
period for which the student
is
debarred,
would
be
considered for calculating the
maximum stipulated time
(seven years) for completing
the program.

F

More than two times indulgence in UFM as per
category B,C and D above.

Award of R grade in all the
subjects in the current
examination and debarring
from the Institute for a period
of one and a half years. The
period for which the student
is
debarred,
would
be
considered for calculating the
maximum stipulated time
(seven years) for completing
the program.

Aggrieved by the decision of the Standing Committee on Unfair Means Cases, a candidate may
make a representation addressed to the Director along with the prescribed fee of Rs. 5000/- for
reconsideration of his/her case. The Director may refer the matter to the Appellate Committee to be
constituted for the purpose for reconsideration. The decision of the Appellate Committee once
approved by the Director shall be final and binding on the candidate.

IMPORTANT NOTES:

I.

The fact that a particular roll no. was booked as UMC should be recorded daily in the
attendance sheet as well as in the statement for dispatch of Answer Sheet to the Controller of
Examination through MIS.

II.

Candidates found using any of the UFM are not to be debarred from appearing in the
remaining papers.

III.

Candidates can be physically searched by the Centre Superintendent / Invigilators /Member
of the team of Observers deputed by Examination Division before or during the examination
at any time except that a female candidate should be searched by a female member only.

- 29 -

IV.

Normally when a candidate goes out to toilet the invigilators must ensure that the Answer
Sheet and Question Paper of the candidate has been left behind on his/her seat in the
examination hall.

V.

At the end of the examination no candidate should be allowed to leave the room till all the
scripts are collected, counted and found correct. If a candidate forces his/her way out with
the answer script, the complete statement explaining the circumstances under which the
candidate has left with the script should be made out. In no case this provision should be
used to cover up the loss of Answer Sheet. The statement should also contain the time of the
incident and details of the case as to how the candidate took away the Answer Sheet as also
efforts made to recover the Answer Sheet.
-xXx-

- 30 -

